(gentle music)
- [Instructor] In this section,
you will learn to define your goods,
services and construction needs,
consider any special requirements,
and describe what you need.
This section should take you approximately
45 minutes to complete.
(gentle music)
To begin the procurement process,
you need to figure out what you need;
or, in procurement terms,
you need to figure out your requirements.
No one else can do this for you.
Your team knows your business.
They know what is needed to support it.
Here's a list of questions that will help you
define your requirements.
What is required and why is it required?
Can the work be broken down into tasks,
activities, or phases?
When is each piece or phase required?
Can one phase begin before the approval
or completion of another?<br>
Will the final delivery be in a modern treaty
or a comprehensive land claims agreement area?
Are there other indigenous considerations
related to procurement?
Where will the work be done?
What skills are required to do the work?
Are you sure about the quantity that is required?
Will this be a recurring requirement?
What are the security requirements?
Who will keep ownership
of any intellectual property generated?
Has accessibility been considered?
Has green procurement been included?
Be clear about what you need.
If you have difficulty defining your requirements,
why not contact your procurement specialists
for a bit of help or to obtain templates.
Or visit the For Government section
of the buyandsell.gc.ca website,
a great source of information.
After all, if you request a motor vehicle,
you don't wanna end up with a smart car
when what you really need is a pickup truck!
(gentle music)
When defining your procurement needs,
think about special requirements
and other considerations.
For example, instead of buying standard chairs,
could you pay a bit more for chairs that are
ergonomic and more durable?
In the long run more people
will be able to use them
and they won't need to
be replaced as often.
That's good news for your
budget and for the environment.
Here are a few questions to get you started.
What are the accessibility or ergonomic needs?
Have you considered getting advice
from people with disabilities?
Is it public facing, meaning
will the public have access to it?
Are there GBA+ considerations?
Has it been prepared in both official languages?
Are there applicable trade agreements?
Does it involve a former public servant?
Is there an intellectual property component?
Do modern treaties or comprehensive
land claims agreements apply?
Does the department have exceptional delegations
like the Department of National Defense?
Does it consider green procurement?
What level of security is involved?
For example, is it secret?
Are there a specialized shipping
or packaging requirements?
Is it of interest to the media?
Will it carry over multiple fiscal years?
If you are not sure that you've considered
all the special requirements,
contact your procurement specialist,
they will have most likely seen
purchases like yours before
and can help you with your requirements.
(gentle music)
You have figured out what you need
and identified your requirements.
That's great!
Let's move on to how you must
document your decisions.
First, you need to draft a description.
There are five ways you can do this.
Let's look at them one by one.
A design specification is a detailed description
of the item to be purchased.
It could include drawings and required dimensions,
size and dimension, materials, physical properties,
quality test results, environmental, ergonomic,
and aesthetic considerations,
accessibility considerations for people with visible
or invisible disabilities,
anticipated repair and maintenance needs,
level of quality to be achieved,
safety standards to be met, etc.
Performance specifications set the operational
requirements of an item or an installation.
In other words, they describe
what the final installed product must be able to do.
They outline the required output, functions
or operations of the item and the equipment.
Combination design and performance specifications
incorporate the attributes of both the performance
specifications and the design specifications.
Purchase description specifications provide a brief
but accurate description of the desired production.
They list the product by national, international
or industrial reference standards,
such as a 10 mm wrench,
a screwdriver or a two-by-four.
Indigenous economic measures
enhance economic opportunities
for Indigenous Peoples
and businesses through increased opportunity
to compete for contracts via the Procurement
Strategy for Aboriginal Business,
the Treasury Board Directive on Government
Contracts, including Real Property Leases
in the Nunavut Settlement Area and through
departmental indigenous economic measures.
Then once you've prepared the description,
you must present it in either a statement of work
or a statement of requirement.
Here's a bit more information on each option.
A statement of work describes the work required
in clear, concise, and meaningful terms.
It includes the deliverables or the services
or work needed to fulfill the contract.
A statement of requirement is
a description of the need
without specifying the exact method to be used.
It includes problem definition information
which will provide context
for the approving authority,
as well as an initial assessment of risk
and basic financial information regarding
what will be produced in the next stage.
Since you will be the one preparing either
the statement of work
or the statement of requirement,
have a look at the job aids provided
provided in the Toolbox for guidance.
(gentle music)
Did you know that when carrying out
their procurement duties,
managers must adhere to the laws, regulations
and policies established by the government?
This means carrying out the procurement process
in a transparent, fair, and open manner
for suppliers. And what happens
if managers don't follow these rules?
Well, there are different levels of authorities
in place that check to make sure that
the rules are being followed.
It is also important that the relationship
between your organization and a contractor
remain on a strictly business level.
Contractors must not be treated as employees
as this would be contrary to or conflict with
the Public Service Employment Act
and common law principles dealing
with employer-employee relationships.
In addition, managers are responsible
for preventing the development
of an employer-employee relationship
for the duration of the contract.
For more information on a transparent,
open and fair procurement process,
see the job aid on "What Not To Do"
as well as the job aid on "Legal Framework".
(gentle music)
I have good news for you!
As a manager you're not expected
to be an expert in procurement.
Your organization will have procurement specialists
to provide guidance and support.
You are however responsible for certain things.
You must make sure that
you have the required funding.
You must provide the technical requirements
and evaluation criteria.
And once received,
you must confirm that the goods and services
are acceptable as per the contract.
So when exactly do you need the help
of a procurement specialist?
Here's some of the general recommendations.
When you do not have the proper transaction
or contracting delegation.
When your department does not have the delegation
to purchase the goods or services itself.
When the requirement falls
to Public Services and Procurement Canada
or Shared Services Canada.
When the procurement requires
Treasury Board approval.
Don't forget, even if you're not required
to consult your procurement specialist for purchases
within your delegated authority,
they're always there to guide you,
answer your questions and support you.
After all why spend hours doing research
and developing documents from scratch
when your procurement specialist
has templates waiting for you!
(gentle music)
Depending on what you are procuring,
you may need to consult stakeholders in security,
information technology, communications,
and translation, to name but a few.
After all, you can't be an expert in every field
and you don't know what you don't know!
In fact, in certain cases you must consult
stakeholders. For essential commodities
such as advertising and public opinion research,
you must use Public Services
and Procurement Canada.
For legal services,
each department has their own assigned lawyers
from the Department of Justice,
and contracts for the performance of legal services
may be entered into only by or under the authority
of the Minister of Justice.
People with a wide range of disabilities
may also use the service or item being procured.
Be sure to consult your department's
network of employees with disabilities
for advice on removing obstacles
to accessibility for the end user.
(gentle music)
You have now defined your requirements and figured
out who you need to consult, what's next?
Well, that depends on the dollar amount
and the complexity of what you need to buy.
You either initiate the purchase of low-dollar-value
procurements using instruments
that you have at your disposal yourself;
or, you work with your procurement specialists
to determine the procurement strategy for more
complex, higher-dollar-value procurements.
Regardless of the procurement strategy
that you choose, always consider
how much time it will take you
to complete the procurement process.
For example, items on the buyandsell.gc.ca website
must be posted for a minimum of 40 days,
as applicable, if subject to
our international trade agreements
or for complex or big-ticket items such as fleets,
the process can take over a year.
So please plan accordingly!
The following exercise will help you
to review your knowledge of procurement
strategies and instruments.
The toolbox also contains a
"Commonly Used Procurement Instruments" job aid.
(gentle music)
Take what you've learned into real life!
Your organization will have
its own ways of doing things.
Take time out from the course to see which
procurement strategies you will use most often.
Find the templates your department uses
and look up examples of
previous purchases for guidance.
This will be helpful when it comes time
for you to choose a procurement strategy.
(gentle music)
Now that you've seen how to define your goods,
services and construction needs,
consider any special requirements,
and describe what you need,
let's see what you remember
by taking this short quiz.
(gentle music)